
## Future Species Distribution

Species distribution models were generated using climate data and species observation records.

Species records were retrieved from the Atlas of Living Australia database. [[section_biodiversity_amphibians > 0]]Records for frog species were supplemented with data from the Queensland Museum and CSIRO. [[section_biodiversity_freshwaterfish > 0]]Additional observations and species range data for freshwater fish were obtained from the Fish Atlas of Northern Australia and consultation with field guides and state museum staff.[[section_biodiversity_reptiles > 0]] The Turtle Tissue Database at the University of Canberra supplied additional turtle records.[[section_biodiversity_birds > 0]] BirdLife Australia provided detailed range information for bird species.[[section_biodiversity_crayfish > 0]] Crayfish data was supplemented with data from published literature and field guides.
[[always]]

Species observation data were filtered to exclude records with obvious issues. Additional vetting was performed by expert researchers from James Cook University. Only species with valid observations in more than ten unique locations were modeled.

Climate suitability maps for a species represent what scientists call a Species Distribution Model or SDM.  These models show the relationship between where species have currently been observed and the climate at that location. Once the relationship between climate and observations is known, it can be projected onto other climate situations.

SDMs were built for two Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs, analogous to greenhouse gas emission scenarios) using 18 global climate models (GCMs) at decadal time steps between 2015 and 2085.  This produced maps of species suitability for each species and projected climate future.

Estimates on each species' ability to disperse from known populated areas were used to clip areas of suitable climate, creating projected distribution ranges.[[section_biodiversity_freshwaterfish > 0
or section_biodiversity_crayfish > 0
or section_biodiversity_amphibians > 0
or section_biodiversity_reptiles > 0]] Freshwater species and other species particularly sensitive to surface water flow were identified (for example, frogs that are obligate stream breeders or have a strong association with flowing water as adults) and hydrology data were used to determine potential dispersal of those species.[[always]]

Projected distribution maps for each taxon were converted to binary values (present/not present), and species richness maps generated by counting the number of species projected to be present at each mapped point.

Models for individual species and class-level bioidversity can be found at [http://tropicaldatahub.org/goto/climas/maps](http://tropicaldatahub.org/goto/climas/maps).
